All databases have this concept
of functions and procedures, and
then we'll talk about triggers,
which have to relate to functions.
So imagine you find yourself
doing the same query over and
over and over again across many
parts of your application.
You can basically use a function to
kind of basically store that query as
something that's kind of ready to go.
So let's, Yeah, let's say we're focusing
on a recipe site with few ingredients,
right?
I don't know, I have a couple
recipe books where basically,
you live at home by yourself and
you only have a pan and five ingredients.
I like those books because,
I don't live by myself, but
I'm also very lazy, so
I like those kind of recipes.
So imagine we have a filter for
that on our recipe website.
So we'd be selecting
from recipe_ingredients,
we'd have some sort of COUNT
(r.title) BETWEEN 4 and 6.
So let's just go ahead and run that.
And you can see here, this is
ingredients where that works, right,
where we have four to six ingredients or
something like that, right?
So by grouping by r.title,
which is a unique key,
we're a grouping by the ingredients,
we're getting something that has four
to six rows worth of ingredients.
And then therefore, because we're grouping
by the title, we can return that up here.
So these are all recipes that have
between four and six ingredients.
Feel free to pull that apart, but
I promise you that's what it does.
So let's say that we're
doing our recipe website,
users start hitting that
specific page a lot,
it gets really popular, it gets way more
popular than the rest of our website.
As a good product owner and
trying to pivot into market fit,
we just say let's do that entirely now,
right?
This is our entire website,
we're gonna focus on these low
ingredient kind of recipes.
So what we could do then is we
could create a function that
gives us that, right?
So we can create this function called
get_recipes_with_ingredients, so we can
give it a between four and six, between
two and three, between one and ten, right?
It gives us some flexibility and
some reusability to it.
This is what functions are for Postgres,
it's one of the things that they can do.
We'll see other things that they can do
later, but that's kind of the idea here.
Now, this is a language called PL/pgSQL,
Programming Language Postgres SQLs, right?
So basically,
it's a SQL kind of programming language.
So you can see here, all of this
looks really similar to SQL, right?
There's a couple of new things like RETURN
QUERY, that's not a part of SQL, but
there's a bunch of stuff in here
that's made to feel very SQL-like.
You can actually do JavaScript here,
you can do Python,
you can do Java, you can do Perl,
and those are the ones I'm aware of.
[LAUGH] It requires you to download
an extension to Postgres and install it.
I thought about doing JavaScript,
because obviously,
this is Frontend Masters,
that would make some sense, but
in the end, I ended up fighting the config
so much, I don't want students to do that.
I haven't used it actually personally
to do it with JavaScript, so actually,
I'm just gonna show you
how to do it with plpgsql,
because this is actually
built into Postgres directly.
And it's SQL, it's an SQL,
of course, it makes sense.
But just know if you're
really getting into this,
you can do it directly with Java,
JavaScript, and so on and so forth.
So let's talk about several
of the things in here.
You don't have to have the OR REPLACE,
but I put this here so you can copy and
paste in multiple times if you decide
that you messed it up or wanna fix it or
try different things.
But you can put CREATE here,
if it exists, it will fail, right?
That's what you need the OR REPLACE for.
You can also drop them, so
you can say drop FUNCTION
get_recipes_with_ingredients, and
it'll get rid of it.
Okay, these are parameters, low and
high, I think that makes sense.
You can provide it with the low, the least
amount ingredients you wanna select for,
or the most, which would be high.
You have to give them a data type,
in this case, they are integers.
You have to identify what
it's going to return,
which is going to be a SETOF,
which is, right, this is a set.
It's a result set, of what?
Of VARCHAR, they're gonna be strings.
You have to tell what language,
which we are doing plpgsql.
And then here, you have to return
the AS basically as the function.
Let's talk just a moment
about dollar signs.
So this is not just related to function,
this is in general
throughout all Postgres.
It actually has this concept of
dollar quotes, I'm not making it up,
it's actually true.
It's basically a quote, so
I can actually come in here,
let's just show you, SELECT meta.
And we were seeing here that you
can do this with single quotes,
right, cuz we were doing like JSON, but
you can actually put dollar signs here.
FROM, we put it on recipes, right?
And, WHERE meta is not null.
Okay, so just to prove a point here,
same thing as single quotes,
kind of weird and neat, right?
So why would you ever
wanna use dollar quotes?
It's sort of things like this,
going back here.
Where we're gonna have, we actually don't
have any single quotes in here, but
the nice thing about doing dollar
quotes is you don't have to escape
single quotes, right?
So if I was doing things where I was
asking for single quotes inside of this,
where I was asking for meta tags,
right, I'd have to double quote those,
cuz you're technically giving Postgres
a string to invoke later, right?
So by using the dollar quotes,
we're getting away from having
to escape our single quotes.
In other words, I really only use
dollar quotes with functions,
I really don't use them other places,
but they are useful for that reason.
Here, we're telling you where
the beginning of our function is,
where we're going to end our function.
Notice that this has a semicolon,
this has a semicolon,
that's cuz we're doing a query here.
This part is actually here, the query.
This is definitely not going to be
a course on the PL/pgSQL language,
cuz I don't know it very well.
I have to go read a lot of Stack Overflow
before I get these functions correct,
but they are useful.
All right, and then here,
this is just pretty normal stuff.
The only thing here is we have low and
high, so
we actually are using variables
directly in our query,
but that seems fairly reasonable for
us to use, right?
Okay, so I'm just gonna copy and
paste this whole thing,
cuz I sincerely do not
wanna write it all out.
So now I have a function,
now how do we query it?
How do we use it?
Well, specifically with functions,
you're gonna say,
SELECT * FROM, and
then you're gonna call the function,
so get recipes_with_ingredients(4, 6).
And notice,
it's the same result set, Right?
But now, it's flexible, I can say 2 and 4.
Turns out that's a lot of them,
so that's 42 rows.
But now we have this flexible thing, if we
were using this everywhere in our website,
this was a really important
search facet for us.
I'm sure you can imagine this
being really useful to you.
First thing I'm gonna say is this is just
one of a couple of ways that you could
accomplish this, but
it's a way to accomplish this, right?
Let's make sure I covered
everything I wanted to here.
So yeah, PL/pgSQL, it's a full language,
it can do a lot of stuff.
It has for loops, it has conditionals,
it's a Turing-complete
programming language.
Someone's probably written doom in it,
right?
I can't prove that, but I just assumed
if it's a programming language,
someone could port a doom to it.
Now, I'm scared to Google
cuz it's probably true.
[LAUGH] Yeah,
it's very SQL-like in nature.
Most of time, it reads very SQL-like.
I'm showing you just kind
of the surface here, but
there's a lot of really powerful stuff
you can do with it that frankly,
I've not written enough Postgres functions
to really tell you too much about.
But let me tell you, yeah, and
then I was gonna show you here.
So if you click on one of these links,
PLV8, this is where you can actually
use JavaScript as the language as
opposed to the built-in Postgres one.
You have to create an extension,
you have to download it,
there's a bunch of stuff to do.
And then it's like a flavor of JavaScript
that has its own variables and
stuff like that.
I've never actually used it,
but it is available.
And then Python,
there's a bunch of other stuff like that,
we talked about dollar quotes.
Just to show you really
quick here in the notes,
if you need to drop that function later,
you can do it like this.
DROP FUNCTION, and then you just
give it the name of the function and
the call signature.
You can technically overload these, right?
So I can have a low,
high, and medium, right?
So you actually do have to tell it what
parameters cuz you have to tell it
the whole signature, but that's the
function that you would run to delete it.
And then so the next thing I
just wanna talk about briefly
is do not go overboard with functions.
So the first question
I'm going to ask you is,
if you write this huge function and then
you store it in your Postgres like this,
it's not going into a source control,
right?
It's not going into the rest of
your code base, that kinda sucks.
So it introduces just like,
it's not unobservable, but
hard to observe behavior
in your application.
So if you're using it a lot
throughout your different
places in your application and it breaks,
it's hard to track down that bug,
because you expect your
database to always be right.
So you're introducing developer
error to your database,
that is scary, that should be scary.
There's ways you can get around that,
you can store the functions locally and
then can commit that to git, and
then when you start up your database,
it's pushed into your database.
It gets messy though, right?
It adds indirection to your application,
and
makes it harder to reason about
what's going on in your application.
So I'm going to invite you to think
about in things like, if you need to do
something that you cannot do in your code
and would not make sense to do in your
code, by all means, this is another
tool in your toolbox to use, right?
You could make your entire application
totally just in Postgres functions if you
wanted.
Dear God, please don't.
[LAUGH] As your potential
future co-worker, just don't,
just write code, right?
They have done some really impressive
things, if you've ever heard of Hasura.
Hasura makes extensive use of Postgres
functions to give you, basically,
GraphQL at the Postgres layer.
It's really impressive stuff, I wouldn't
wanna work on their codebase, personally.
So that's my pitch for you.
If you're doing something that really can
only be done at the database layer or
it makes a lot of sense to do at the
database layer, think about using these.
Otherwise, I'd say just put it in your
Node code or your Python code or whatever.
Yeah, any questions?
>> If you're not writing
the SQL code locally,
how do you view the function again, if you
wanna see what the function actually is?
>> There's a way to do it,
I don't know though.
>> [LAUGH] I think you might
be able to say just \d or
something like that, I don't know.
I'd look in this this \?.
>> \df.
>> \df, so
that'll give you the functions that exist,
thank you.
But if you actually wanna see
the body of the function,
you'd have to do some sort
of querying to get it.
>> On the result part, if you,
or the return signature,
can you have it return multiple columns?
You just delineate that with a comma?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> So
there's a bunch of stuff you can do that.
You can actually write to
the database with functions,
we'll actually do that
here in just a second.
Basically, anything you can do with SQL,
you can do with functions.